README.md, before:

# ACM Research coding challenge (Fall 2022)

This semester's challenge is especially open-ended. [Here is a dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/chancev/carsforsale) on Kaggle called "CarsForSale". It contains data scraped from the online car marketplace Cars.com. Each row contains 25 pieces of information about a car's listing, such as its price, year, model, and color.

The challenge is to do *something interesting* with the data. Can you find a pattern, answer a question, or create a visualization? In case nothing comes to mind, here are some ideas, with varying complexity:

- What qualities about a car do buyers seem to value the most?
- Make a graph to visualize the most popular car models over time.
- What colors of cars are most expensive?
- Do different brands try to appeal to people looking for different things?
- Come up with your own algorithm to figure out how good of a deal a listing is and compare it to the one in the dataset (`DealType`).
- Use [cluster analysis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cluster_analysis) to group the cars into categories.
- How do people's taste in cars differ between states?
- Train a machine learning model to predict some aspect of a car based on other information from its listing.

However, we strongly encourage you to come up with your own problem to solve!

You can use any programming language, framework, or library you want, but we recommend [creating a notebook in Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/docs/notebooks) and using Python. This will run in your browser, interlaces code with documentation, allows you to import the CarsForSale dataset easily by pressing the "Add data" button, and gives you access to Python's high-quality, high-level libraries for working with data. [Learn more about data science in Python.](https://www.w3schools.com/datascience/ds_python.asp)

## How to submit your solution

1. [Create a  **public**  fork of this repository](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/quickstart/fork-a-repo) and name it  `ACM-Research-coding-challenge-22F` (click the "Fork" button in the top right).

2. Replace this README file with a description ([written in Markdown](https://docs.github.com/en/get-started/writing-on-github/getting-started-with-writing-and-formatting-on-github/about-writing-and-formatting-on-github)) of your solution. Regardless of your success, describe the problem you set out to solve and how you did it. Split it up into sections with headers, and, if relevant, include figures.

3. Make sure to include all relevant files in your fork. If you made the project in a Kaggle notebook, click **File** → **Download Notebook** to download it as an `.ipynb` file.

4. You may have to "clone" the fork you made to edit files locally on your computer and "push" them to GitHub. Learn how to do that [here](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/cloning-a-repository).

4. Submit the link to your fork in this [form](http://apply.acmutd.co/research-coding-challenge).

## No collaboration policy

**You may not collaborate with anyone on this challenge.** You _are_ allowed (and encouraged) to use internet documentation. If you use existing code (either from Github, Stack Overflow, or other sources), **please cite your sources in the README**.

## Timing

Please don't spend too long on this project: **30 to 60 minutes** is reasonable. It's okay to put more time into your submission than that, but we don't expect you to get that much done; we really don't want this challenge to be a burden!

If you're *completely new* to this kind of project, however, it will likely take you more than an hour. This is a *densely useful* project to go through (you will learn a lot), so we believe this is justified.

## Assessment criteria

Submissions will be evaluated holistically, in combination with the rest of your application. We will consider your effort, use of external resources, how you approached the problem, and presentation, among other considerations.

## Support and questions

Feel free to ask for clarifications in the #research-qna channel in the [ACM UTD Discord server](https://discord.gg/nJxRdKdG4d)! You can also directly message Roman Hauksson on Discord: `RomanHauksson#3458`.

Commit message:

Updated README.md with solution explanation

README.md, after:

# Predicting Car Prices

## The Problem

Pricing a car competitively is a tricky problem for car sellers. The price cannot be too high as the car won't sell, but the price cannot be too low since the seller would make a loss.

I set out to solve this problem by creating a program which can predict the price of a car based on some of its features.

## My Approach

The first thing I did was analyze the dataset provided to see what features I could use. I was looking for qualities of the car that would correlate the most with price. To visualize the data using Python, I used the ```seaborn``` library and created a pair plot.

After analyzing the scatter plot of all the data points graphed against each other, I noticed that the ```Year```, ```Mileage```, and ```Used/New``` columns had a large factor in determining the price. There was a clear exponential correlation between price and year / mileage. Furthermore, although there were no "New" cars in the dataset, it appeared that "Certified" cars were newer and had less miles on them.


![](https://i.vgy.me/fZjP7n.jpg)

---

## Creating the program

To work with the dataset and train a ML model, I used Python along with the ```pandas``` library and the ```scikit-learn``` library respectively. Now that I had figured out what data points I would be using, I cleaned up the ```Price``` column and turned it into an integer, while also encoding the ```Used/New``` column so that it could be used in the ML algorithm.

Before continuing, I started to explore which ML algorithm was appropriate for this problem. Since ```Price``` was a continous value, I used a decision tree regression algorithm to predict the price based on year, mileage, and used/new status.

After splitting the dataset into training and testing, I created a new ```DecisionTreeRegressor()``` and trained the model. The model was a great fit, having a $r^2$ score of around -0.7. I also allowed for user input to let a seller input the features of their car into the model and get the predicted price.

## Conclusion

Through this coding challenge, I learned the nuances of Python and also why it is extremely powerful for ML. It was truly a learning experience for me to combine my statistics and programming knowledge to solve a real-world problem. I also got to know the libraries of Python much better as well as how to tackle a database with a large number of datapoints.

---

## Resources

[Seaborn API](https://seaborn.pydata.org/api.html)

[Scikit-learn API](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/classes.html)

[Pandas API](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/index.html)

[Types of ML Algorithms](https://www.sas.com/en_gb/insights/articles/analytics/machine-learning-algorithms.html#)

[Python Docs](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/)
